# Why this book?
*by [Jack Dougherty](introduction/who.md), last updated February 20, 2017*

*Data Visualization for All*, an open-access online textbook, seeks to help you tell your story -- and show your data -- through the power of the public web.

This open-access book reflects what I've learned while teaching data visualization [to undergraduate students at Trinity College](http://commons.trincoll.edu/dataviz), and now [to a global online class on the Trinity edX platform](https://www.edx.org/school/trinityx). Over the past few years, Trinity students and I have built interactive charts and maps in partnership with non-profit organizations in Hartford, Connecticut, to help them share their stories with data on the public web. Also, my students and colleagues have used these tools to create [On The Line: How Schooling, Housing, and Civil Rights Shaped Hartford and its Suburbs](http://ontheline.trincoll.edu), an open-access book-in-progress that features interactive historical maps of urban-suburban change. Students and colleagues who wrote tutorials, designed learning exercises, or developed code templates for *Data Visualization for All* are listed as [co-authors](introduction/who.md).

Although my outstanding colleagues have professional training, do not confuse them with me, the proverbial "Jack of all trades, master of none." I do not consider myself an expert in data visualization, nor should anyone mistake me for a computer scientist or data scientist. Inspect my higher education transcripts and you'll see only one computer science class (something called FORTRAN77 back in 1982), and not a single course in statistics, sadly. Instead, my desire to learn data visualization was driven by my need as an historian to tell stories about urban-suburban places and change over time. If you've ever watched me teach a class or deliver a presentation on these topics -- always talking with my hands in the air -- you'll understand my primal need to create charts and maps. Stories become more persuasive when supported with data, especially well-crafted images that convey data relationships more clearly than words. Furthermore, these data stories become more powerful when we share them online, where they reach broader audiences who can interact with and evaluate our evidence.

In the early 2000s, when I began to dabble in data visualization, our tools were expensive, not easy to learn, and not designed to share our stories on the public web. (One of my well-worn jokes is point to the bald spot on my head, and claim that it was caused while tearing out my hair in frustration while using ArcGIS.) But everything began to change around 2005 when Google Maps publicly released its application programming interface (API) that allowed people with some coding skills to show data points on an interactive web map. Gradually, between 2008-11, I began learning what was possible by working on map projects with talented programmers and geographers, such as Jean-Pierre Haeberly at Trinity, and Michael Howser at the [University of Connecticut Libraries Map and Geographic Information Center](http://magic.lib.uconn.edu/) (MAGIC, my favorite acronym), thanks to a grant from the [National Endowment for the Humanities](http://www.neh.gov). Free and low-cost workshops sponsored by [The Humanities and Technology Camp](http://thatcamp.org) (THATCamp) at the Center for History and New Media at George Mason University, and [Transparency Camp](https://sunlightfoundation.com/transparency-camp/) by the Sunlight Foundation, introduced me to many people (especially Mano Marks and Derek Eder) who demonstrated easier-to-use tools and templates, such as Google Fusion Tables and GitHub. Closer to home, Alvin Chang and other data journalists at the [Connecticut Mirror](http://ctmirror.org) showed me how to tell stories on the web with more flexible open-source tools, such as Leaflet and Highcharts.

All of these data visualization lessons I learned have been **so valuable** -- to me, my students, our community partners, and thousands of readers on the web -- that my co-authors and I have agreed to share our knowledge with everyone, **for free**. This open-access book is guided by the principle of democratization of knowledge for the public good, hence the book's title: *Data Visualization for All*. Not everyone can afford to make this choice, I realize. But the [mission of Trinity College](http://www.trincoll.edu/AboutTrinity/mission/Pages/default.aspx) is to engage, connect, and transform, with both our local city of Hartford and the world at large. Since Trinity already pays my salary as a tenured professor, the right thing to do with the knowledge my students and I have gained is to pay it forward. That's why we created *Data Visualization for All.*

If this free book is valuable for your education, then join us by sharing and supporting it for future readers:
- Tell your friends about the book and share the link via social media, text, or email
- Improve the book by adding comments or suggesting new chapters on our GitBook platform
- [Donate to support DataViz students at Trinity College](../donate) to expand the book and continue work with community partners

Try out the tutorials, explore the online examples, share what you've learned with others, and dream about better ways to tell your data stories.

{% footer %}
{% endfooter %}
